Sorry about that.
So you have to ask your lab instructor
to open new attempt for you.
If you already submitted the lab
eight or lab 9 and or or about the
lectures so your lab instructor
can open a new attempt for you.
OK, this is about the labs I mean
and the lecture extensions are.
So today we are going to finish the
process control which is the chapter
eight of the book and then we start
the Chapter 10 of the book about
signal signaling between processes.
And which is a?
The opening and opening for a
very important topic called
Interprocess communication.
So when we signal a process,
another actually the another
process issues is signal.
Process issues a signal to another process,
and we can think of this signaling as
a communication between two processes.
So, but signaling is not the only
communication between processes.
We have different ways of communication
between processes and we call
it interprocess communication.
As an instance,
today we are going to cover the
signaling and next week we are
going to introduce more ways of
communication between processes.
And and this topic is, and I mean is a,
I mean trivial consequence of having
multiple processes inside the memory.
If we don't have multiple process,
if you only have one process inside
the memory and Colonel and the shell,
there is no need for interprocess
communication.
The only communication happens
with the kernel and your process.
But when we have multiple
processes inside the memory,
then.
It's good to have to provide
communication between them.
So, uh. This is because of the I mean
multiprocessing environment or the most
programming environment inside the computer
system using a single process processor.
But before we start, I mean we start
the communication between a the
different processes inside the memory.
We have to do a recap on the lifecycle
of a process inside a memory.
Usually it's called process states or
life cycle of a process inside of memory.
So we already know that we have
a program written in a language,
but it's a dead body we have to bring it
inside the memory to make it runnable.
So when we bootstrap a program into a memory,
it becomes a process. However,
inside a multi processing environment.
Processor cannot be assigned
right away to the process. Uh,
basically when you bootstrap your process,
your programming so the memory
it goes into a Q.
Or into a list of, uh,
I mean processes and then it waits for
the kernel to assign the processor to the.
Bootstrap process.
It's like a chess player that
registers into a competition,
but it's not assigned any game or
any chess board to start the game.
This is there is called the ready,
which usually we call it a process.
I mean now the program becomes a process,
but it's not running any opcode.
It is waiting for the processor.
And then when the kernel decides to
assign a share of processor or time,
it slices of the processor to the process.
So basically this list or queue.
You can think of it as a I mean in
real world queue there are some priorities.
So the kernel gives a processor more
to the more important processes.
Also it depends on The Who who came
first and who wants to finish.
Sooner so you can think of this as a.
Kind of first in first out,
but this is not, I mean two.
It's a priority queue in the
operating system course.
You'll learn more about the
list of the list of processes.
Inside any readystate.
So the
P1, P2, up until Pn these are n processes waiting
for the processor and the kernel decide
which one should be picked and which
one should be assigned the processor.
For instance, if PDO has a higher priority.
It gets the processor sooner.
And it goes to the running state.
In the lab in the lecture 09 we
talked about something called Nice or
niceness of a process in Unix platform.
If a process wants to.
Ask for more processor share or
increase the priority of itself.
It should reduce its niceness,
meaning that basically the
logic is in the reverse order.
A niceness means that a
process that is generous,
meaning that it wants to share.
I mean, gives his own share
process to others.
If you want to not to be generous,
you have to be more mean meaner,
meaning that you don't want to share
your share of processor and you want
not only your share of processor,
but you want more.
So you have to increase your
niceness or nicety and as a result
you increase your priority and then
the panel gives you more processor.
However, if you increase your niceness,
meaning that you want to be more generous,
you give more priority to
others than yourself.
So you are kind of sacrificing
yourself for other processes,
so you increase your niceness as a result
with decrease or lower your priority.
Anyways, at the end of the day,
if you receive a processor share,
are you going to the running state?
And in the running state,
if you have only one single processor,
only one process out of all the ready
processes can be in the runnable state.
Like a chess player that receives
the chess board and a set of
chess pieces to start the game.
All the other chess players are waiting
for this player to do some moves.
And if your process.
I could finish quickly within the
assigned time slices of the process,
so it goes to termination state.
So like a chess.
I mean a player or chess master
that can checkmates the rival
just in one or two moves.
However,
usually it's not any possible or
usually our processes is not like just
finish quickly using our process.
Maybe need some input from the user
and if the user waits for one or
two hours or one or two minutes,
so our process actually waits
for the user input.
As a result,
the kernel can get the processor
back from you and then make you
go through a blocking state.
We said that a kernel.
Not only can I stop the execution
of the processor by halt,
but also it can stop the process.
I mean,
the execution of a process
by blocking the process.
So then your process goes
to the blocking state.
So although in the running state
we have only one process in a
single processing environment.
Like a ready state in the blocking state.
We have a list of all the
processes that are blocked.
Twice as P5P10 and etc.
These are all the processes that
are black and they are weather
waiting for IO or for instance
there are other scenarios.
For instance they are waiting
for their child to finish.
We already saw that the parent
process an issue.
The system called weight,
meaning that it wants to be blocked
up until the child or the children
finish their tasks and then the
parents can continue the execution.
Like a chess player that is awaiting
for who is waiting for her rivals
move so as long as other rivals
his rival doesn't do any move.
So the chess player should
be in awaiting mistake.
So during this waiting state,
the processor can be
assigned to other processes.
When the processor,
I mean the user, for instance,
enters some inputs and press the new line.
Or a device and the requested
data or the child finishes in
any of these scenarios or other
scenarios that you can think of it.
A black processor become ready
to execute again, however,
it doesn't go directly to the runnable
state because we have already a lot
of processes in the radio state.
So you have to go back to the queue.
So I found the blocking blocking
instead you go to their radius
state and wait for the processor.
So as in a normal cycle of a
processor process inside the memory,
usually we have this cycle, so you have a.
Your process goes to the radio state.
Received some time.
It slices of the processor,
do some opcodes and then goes the blocking
state and then after receiving the input
from the user or the child finishes,
it goes to the ready state waiting
for the processor again and etc.
I mean again receiving the processor and
it's so this is the normal cycle of any.
I mean normal process.
But sometimes your process doesn't have any.
I mean it doesn't need any input
from the user, or doesn't do any.
I mean sending or receiving information
from devices or doesn't have any child.
What happens in this scenario?
So for instance, you just write it.
An algorithm that does just some computation
without a need for user input or without
a need for a device input output.
A similar way would be this,
for instance,
you remember we write a main function that
does the addition between two numbers.
We could write in main function without
the parameters or we ask the user to.
Input the numbers when it says number
A and then ask the number B and etc.
So this way our program waits
for the IO in order to.
I mean it waits for the user
to input some numbers.
We said that we could write and
another way we could say that we can
write a mean by the argc and argv.
And then we just simply do
addition of the arc.
The first parameter to the program and
then the second parameter to the program.
And then we will run the program.
We just simply pass the parameter
of our program inside the shell.
So this way our program doesn't
wait for the user input at the time
that it is bootstrapped in memory.
It already has the values,
so this program doesn't have any IO,
so it just simply goes to the memory
and then execute the addition.
Even in this case that there is no
blocking state or I or or for the
child to be to finish the task.
It's still your program may takes a
lot of time to do all the calculations
and the time it slices that is
assigned to you by the kernel might
be less than the required I mean.
Slices.
So for instance,
if you need 10 times slice of processor.
But they can and they assign
you only two time slices,
so you just go to the running state.
You run two opcodes,
you you're the processor
cannot be retrieved from you.
As a result,
you go back to the ready state
to the back of the queue,
and then you wait for another two slices.
After a while you receive another two slices,
you run another two opcodes and
then you back to the queue.
So again,
even in this case you gonna
go to the radio state.
But here you don't have any
blocking state because you are
executing your opcode and suddenly
the processor is fetched from you.
Uh, and then as a result you go to
the radio state because you are
not waiting for other resources.
You only you're only
waiting for the processor.
And finally, if you have the
processor and you could run your
last upload of your program,
you go into determination state.
Uh, like it. I mean, it's chess player.
That check makes the uh,
the rival after I mean,
a lot of I mean weightings, and.
Back and forth and getting
the chess board and etc.
Finally, I mean checkmates move and
then determination of the game.
And here is the whole, uh,
lifecycle of a process inside the memory.
This is just for one process.
But for the inside, the kernel, uh,
the QS for ready States and for the blocking.
A state and who currently has the
processor is, uh, I mean is monitored
somewhere inside the kernel.
So we have one Q here.
Q1 we have one Q here, Q2.
You can read more about these cues
in the course operating system.
And they are when in that
course you are learning.
How the process manager
handles multiple processes?
So any questions so far?
Or we made some asks that an infinite loop,
meaning that the busy waiting loop
caused the process to be blocked, no?
From the US. So let me back to this picture.
Let me just. Here the whole.
So miss I'm asked that if we have
a busy loop or I mean four, look.
Basically your program has this way.
So Maine. And it has just a while.
1. And do nothing. This program,
if you run this program, it just do nothing.
I'm just busy waiting.
It doesn't go to the blocking state.
The thing is that first of what
it goes to the radio state.
And then it waits. For instance,
if we already have P1 and P2 in the queue,
so it becomes the your program
becomes the P3.
This is your program, your process.
So the P1 had the processor,
does some tasks and maybe go to the
blocking step waiting for IO or
goes back to the back of the cube.
And then the P2 Gos received the processor.
For instance,
we slice of the processor does
two opcodes and then.
Goes back to the key back of
the Q and now sorry.
And now you have the processor.
So when you have the processor,
this while loop says.
Assuming that this is the first code,
so you have only two slices.
So you have.
Or this oversimplified example?
For instance you have you have the
opportunity to run only two opcodes.
What would be that those opcodes?
So checking the condition?
So this is 1 opcode and then
if the condition is true,
you go inside the bracket,
which is nothing and then you
come come back to the checking.
So you do the checking whether the I
mean the condition is equal to true.
And then you go to.
To the wild that command go to why?
You do this, you lose the processor and
then you go back to the back of the.
A cute and then again each time you
do this condition so you never blood.
Are you process always do the checking,
wait for the processor and then goes?
I mean receive the processor,
do the checking back to the queue. Yeah.
Exactly, so one thing,
one interesting thing would be this.
I I really suggest you to do this.
Uh, it's. It's a nice experience.
Or write such this simple program.
And increase the higher priority
or decrease your nicety niceness.
So make your nice zero meaning
that this process gets the
highest priority in the queue.
As a result.
The kernel gives the whole
process are always.
You are in the front of the queue
because you have the highest priority.
Even if you go back to the queue
because you have the highest
priority will be retrieved first.
As a result, you always have the processor,
so the only process inside,
I mean in a running is still going
to be your process and you're wasting
the process processor and you are not
letting other processes to have it.
So what happens to the P1 and P2?
If your process has the highest priority
and consumes the processor but do nothing.
What happens to the other processes?
We call it the other processes.
Ghana is starved.
And finally,
we could say that they're gonna die,
but in the computer we don't say we
they're gonna die because they still
alive inside the queue for the ready state.
We can say that starving meaning
that they they don't have any
opportunity to run even one opcode.
This is an interesting problem
in operating system and you read
more about this in that course.
Yeah.
If you try this in your local
your your computer, you have to
turn off your computer or you
have to restart your computer.
One thing is that even if you increase
your the priority of your process,
it gets higher priority than the kernel.
Uh, it depends on the implementation
of the operating system,
so you usually the operating system
inside the queue for the ready process.
It never allows.
Other processes to have higher
priority than the kernel.
So usually the kernel processes of the
process kernel PID one has the highest
priority and all the other processes.
Lower process priority.
So, uh, this is based on the
implementation of the operating system.
No worries, so we have
a question from Victor.
How does the system avoid blocking
an opcode that is part of the
way through the execution?
We only just finished the
correct line and then put that
process back into the queue.
Oh, in the in in this state.
For instance, one of the
opcodes is that this can have
a variable a from the input.
When the processor executes this,
uh, again in this process,
the device manager, the File Manager,
and the process manager is involved
or involved in this process.
So what happens is that, uh?
This is a library routine.
So it becomes a system call,
so we already saw this.
So it becomes a read system call.
But from the standard
input which is the zero,
the file description zero is standard input.
And this system called goes
to Colonel and the Colonel.
It has the option to issue the
hall to the processor or it has
the option to put your process.
Inside the blocking state.
Inside the blocking and
then give the processor.
Issue a IP.
Change the address of the IP inside
the processor to the address of.
Another process,
but for the last command of another process.
For instance, if we already have
P5 inside the radius state,
but the P5 was at the
state at the OP code 10.
So it puts the address of the.
Inside the process 5,
but which add which opcode opcode #10.
So this way the processor 5 gonna
have the processor and it starts
funding next command opcode 10 so
it goes the running state and does
the opcode 10 for its process.
But your process goes in the blocking step.
The blocking instead is nothing,
just a list which just kernel
doesn't give processor to them.
So what happens when the this blocking
process goes to the radio state?
So behind the scene when you put a keystroke.
It does a IRQ.
To the processor and the IQ
says that what is the IQ number?
So the IQ number 2, for instance,
switches for keyboard,
so then it calls the kernel.
You see that who calls the
kernel the processor,
but you may ask that the processor was
given to the process five what happens?
The IRQ when it's it's electrical
shock to the processor.
When the processor received the IRQ.
It stops execution the execution
of the process 5 opcodes.
Basically it gives higher priority to the IQ,
handle it the kernel.
So again this processor stops.
It goes to the kernel and then the
kernel knows that it should put the P5.
Back to the readystate.
And then, uh, receive?
I'm handed the keys to the
characters from the input and then
brings the your process because
the input is available into the
radio state and then decides.
Who's turn is for the processor.
So this is the whole set.
I mean flow for the.
Assigning a process when
receiving the IRQ by the kernel.
So in this course you have to simplify that,
but in operating system you read more
about the whole scenario. Hopefully.
OK, so one thing I have to explain is that.
So let's do a recap from the very beginning.
Assuming that you just turn on your computer.
We already said that when you
turn on your computer, the BIOS,
which is a hardware program
which is embedded in hardware
and written by the manufacturer.
Helps to find ways the master boot
record the mass it would record is the
first record of a device storage device
which has the address of the location
of the kernel inside data storage.
All the fires and the
directors of the kernel.
So the master boot record knows
the address of the kernel.
As a result, it loads the kernel.
And the Colonel.
With the straps inside the
memory as a process,
we said that anything executable
inside the memory is a process,
so they cannot become process
itself and it is assigned.
It assigns the PID one to itself.
So inside the this process is running under a
function name called init or initialization.
So there's a history behind this function.
You can search on the YouTube about Leonard
Sturwold about who I mean, the Linux founder.
Uh, talking about the.
Uh, I mean how the init function actually
happened in the Linux version of the I
mean implementation of the Unix. Anyways,
the whole kernel starts as a process ID,
one with the name of function called in it.
And what happens next?
We said that right after the kernel,
we need the shell to be Buddhist
trapped inside the memory because the
shell helps us to run our program.
So in it. After doing some I mean stuff.
I mean making ready for,
I mean managing all the hardware of
the computer system. It does a fork.
Meaning that trading a new child. Why?
Because the new child gonna be the task,
the the container or the executable
process for the shell.
So you do have four very similar to what
you what you've done in the lab 08.
You do a fork and give the execution
of the shell as a task to the child.
And the child exact one of them.
I mean,
we already said that in the lab we
have about seven different execution
system called one of them that
you are using in the lab.
08 is the exact.
If the environment variable.
Uh, if you want to see that what
version of what version of the exact
was executed this you have to see the
exact source code of the Unix operating
system or the Linux in the web.
But the main important thing here is this.
By any of these execution system calls.
The path of the shell.
Gonna be passed through this
and as a result the whole.
Memory space of the child process
becomes occupied by the Shell program.
So the shell would be the bash shell program
or would be SH program shell or Z shell.
Any type of the shell that the we know,
so buy it depends on the
default shell of the system.
If your default in the system,
for instance like a computer
system in the school,
it is bash for your user.
As a result, the fork,
the child process execute the bash program.
As a shell for you.
In Mac OS the default is Z shell.
As a result, when you opened a terminal.
It works in new child and they execute dizzy.
I mean shell program for you.
When the this system called happens
or basically we are running the
shell program inside the memory.
Basically we make the
shell program as a process.
Have you already said that
by execution system called?
There is no new process.
The process is still that child process,
but the content of the child process
becomes replaced by the new program file.
So then we see the command
prompt at the shell.
And the shell is waiting for us to
input some the name of a program file.
So, assuming that we have the shell
and you put the, your program may.
A with two argument,
25 that does the addition
of the two and five.
At this,
when you press the enter
in the shell program.
The shell does another
fork to create a new child,
and this child becomes the
grandchild of the kernel.
As you can see this hierarchy.
But this is the child of the shell,
which is the grandchild of the Colonel.
And then inside this new child
or the grandchild.
We have another execution
and this execution.
Calls for the program files of your program.
And as a result, the content of the child
process or this grandchild becomes empty
and becomes filled by the program files.
Of you. And now we have your program
inside the memory and do whatever
your program is going to do.
And after a your program is
done as a child of the shell.
We said that any parent should do a
wait so when they shell does the fork
and gives the I mean creating new
child and gives it to your program.
It does the wait waiting for the child
process which is executing your program.
And then your program is done.
The wait, which is a blocking, uh, I mean.
System called wakes up.
So basically,
the shell wakes up and then becomes
ready for another command from the user.
You can. Uh, say that. In it,
which is the ancestor or the
godfather of all the processes?
Also should do await?
Because at some point the shell gonna end.
And as a result, we wait for the
shell to end and then we receive the.
The we go back to the shell,
but The thing is that because the
shell is a kind of running a busy wait,
does the busy waiting and always ready
for our new command or a new program.
As a result, there is usually
there's no need for this.
Wait by the kernel. And there's always a.
After this law I mean.
In the lab 09, you saw a example of this,
basically the shell.
It's a very oversimplified version
of the shell.
Actually, there is a while.
In this one, if there is a new command in
new program for inside the command prompt,
it does the 4th and then execute the program,
waits for your program to finish,
and then when it's done it come back to the.
While and waits for another command
so it's a continuous loop waiting for
a new program file entered by you.
So this is a very simplified version
of what happens from the very
beginning up until your program going
to execute in the computer system.
And, uh, we're gonna finish this
topic by jump by some topics
for you to do more research.
So one way is that is it possible to ask
the kernel to have more processor sharing?
We already discussed this.
Uh, in the Unix operating system we
have the nice property of the process.
Uh, in the lecture summary you
read more about that and you
can do research more about that.
The second is that is it possible
to see the list of ready processes?
I said that there is a queue for all the
reading process is waiting for the processor.
Is it possible to ask the kernel to give us
the list of the process names or the PID's?
Is it possible to have the list of
pid's for all the blocked processes
inside the computer system?
Is it possible to have a list of old zombies?
Zombies are those child processes that are
waiting for their parents to do the wait.
So we already discussed that.
So is it possible to distinguish?
I mean, to find the zombies.
This is important because.
A zombies are wasting the memory
space we have to make sure that
the parent does the waiting.
Some parents forget to do that.
Some parents.
I mean they are just forgetful
like in the real world,
so they don't care about their child.
As a result the child becomes zombie forever.
Uh, and the kernel doesn't take
the responsibility too,
so it's just wasting the time
they would never space,
so it's good to know what are
the zombies in your system,
and if after a while they state
you can kill them.
Also, the orphans.
Is it possible to see the orphan child?
We know that the orphan child is not
that dangerous because the kernel takes
the responsibility up until they finish.
Is they finish?
But it's still you are able to
see whether the orphan child
process inside a computer system.
Another question is that is it possible for
the process to have more than one child?
That's the answer is yes in the lab 09.
Actually you see how to create multiple,
I mean child or? I mean,
having children for your for yourself and
giving different tasks to different child.
And the grandchild you already saw
an instance. All the all our program
is a grandchild of the Colonel.
Because they are the child of the shell
and the shell is the child of the kernel.
Also, your program can do another four.
As a result, you have a grand grandchild
of the kernel, so it is possible to have.
For a normal process,
your program to have child,
grandchild, brand, grandchild, etc.
So this hierarchy.
Inside your program,
if you do another 4.
And then in your inside your child
to another floor.
So this hierarchy can goes forever.
And now we're gonna go for the
next topic. But before that I'm
ready to check your questions.
So Victor asks a.
The initial four,
called the initial four call.
Bootstraps to Colonel,
why is a four required to do
with this topic, Colonel?
And does that imply that the
core of the operating system has
at least one clone in memory?
Before the kernel there is no fork.
Uh, nobody folks? For the kernel,
the kernel is the main process,
which is the main parent.
There is. Basically this is a God.
The kernel is a God,
meaning that there is no pattern for the God.
It just there in the street device
and it bootstraps inside the
memory and becomes the process.
Nobody does the for for the kernel.
But the kernel this port is by the kernel.
In order to give the task of
Shell to this new child.
So this is the. So let me.
Erase all, yeah.
Outside
is 4. Is done by the Colonel. So.
It is inside the init function,
so inside the init function
we have some lines of code.
Suddenly we have therefore.
And the return PID for the
init function inside the
candle is the PID of the shell.
Makes sense, victor.
And all the other child does the
execution to bootstrap the other programs
and clone them inside the memory.
But for the kernel the bias with the
help of massive would record does that.
So miss I'm asked that why the
PID of the shell? And the exact
function inside a are the same.
Oh, you are saying this?
Why the PID? Of this child process,
this is a child process which,
given the task of running the shell,
the idea of the child process is exactly
the same as the idea of the shell.
So in the previous slide we said that,
oh, I think I have it
somewhere here we just said.
Ah. I thought I had it somewhere here, but.
OK, so let me a recall.
Recall that from the previous
lecture in the previous lecture we
said that if this is the memory.
So if this is our parents.
When the patent does the fork.
The kernel make a copy of the
parent as the child process.
And then the child can do the exact.
When the child does the exact,
what happens is that.
The kernel empties all the child process,
but there's still the child
process ID is the same,
doesn't change the idea of the child,
but all the content of the memory
of the child gonna be emptied.
So there is nothing inside and then.
The program that is passed inside the
argument, for instance you said that may.
Your program file gonna be bootstrap
inside the same memory space of the child.
So it's kind of.
Occupying or kind of, uh, I mean.
Invading the memory space of the
child so the child PID doesn't change,
but the content changes.
That's why the PID is the same.
So Victor asks. But why do we
need a fork to bootstrap a shell?
Uh. So if we don't do that.
I mean, if we don't create a
new child for the shell so.
We have to, uh, I mean, at some point we
have to bootstrap the shell inside the,
uh, I mean inside the memory. So.
We have to do it inside the init,
so if we do it exacution then the
content of the kernel gonna be
emptied and filled with the shell.
So there is no kernel anymore in the
inside the memory but we need the
Colonel so we cannot do that inside.
I mean we cannot exactly.
The shell inside the units because
it replaces the kernel contact.
In order to avoid that, we have to do.
I mean we have to fork and create a
new child and then fill out the content
of the new trial process by the shell.
So basically in the lab 08 you
face the same problem you did.
You have to do 2 system calls for the exact.
But if you do the first one.
It fills out the whole memory
space of your program.
As a result, there is no way to
get execute the second command
because there is no second command.
So as a result, in order to avoid that,
you have to create a new child and
then use the memory space of the
new child for your new program file.
This is the same here.
If you run the shell inside
the kernel by the exact.
Uh, you gotta lose the content
of the kernel from the memory.
So in order to avoid that,
you need a child and then empty
the content of the child and fill
it with the content of the shell.
Yeah.
Exactly exactly when you do 4,
the content of the child is overwritten,
not the content of the parent.
OK, so now I'm going to go to the next topic,
which is the consequence of having
multiple processes inside the memory
communication between the processes.
One of one of the immediate question that
you may ask is that is it possible for a
parent to communicate with this child?
So in a real life,
all the parents communicate with the
child in order to nurture them and etc.
So is it possible to do that?
Also the reverse, is it possible for the
child to communicate with the parent?
Ask something, ask for help and etc.
So the same happens in the operating
system inside the computer system.
A child process wants to communicate
with the parent and the reverse the
parent wants to communicate with the child.
At the higher level at the I
mean kind of more general level,
is it possible to?
Uh, provide a communication between
any process with any other process.
So if we have this memory.
Inside the memory we may have.
A lot of processes.
For instance, P2 is the parent of P3.
P2 is the path is the charge.
I mean the child of the AP1, so.
P1 is the path of P2.
So is it possible for communication
between child and parent?
The answer is yes.
Is it possible to communicate
within any process? For instance,
the child P3 communicate with the child P2.
Is it possible to do that?
Or P2 as a parent.
Communicate with the child period.
Sorry, P. Sorry, I'll keep you 4.
So this pattern communicate
with the child P2.
The answer is yes.
How about the P4 at the child of P3?
Communicate with the parent P1,
then I suggest.
Exactly the same inside the real world,
so your child can communicate with
the parents of another child and etc.
So this is called into it.
This is called interprocess communication,
and you're going to see how it is possible
inside UNIX based operating system.
So we start with a very basic one
communication within a parent
to the child just One Direction.
So we already saw this.
We said that a parent should
implement or we should carries
all the tasks of the child.
Because when the child created when
the child is created by the 4th,
it's an exact copy of the parent.
So if their parents has the task
of the child as a copy of that,
it's not going to have the task.
So one way to pass the information
is using this idea of copy
between the child and the parent.
So. We already saw this
generation generative model.
We said that if this is the parent,
the parent does the forking and by
just checking the return PID we can
say that we are either the parent
process or we are the child process.
Inside this part we put all the task that
is going to be given to the child process.
Although the patent has it,
but when it at runtime.
When, uh, we had a copy of the parent as
a child because the child PID gonna be 0.
Inside the child process,
these lines of code going to be
reachable only by the child copy,
not by the parent.
So.
In order to pass more information to the
child on top of these tasks or lines of code,
you could simply say that yes,
before the four,
we can define a lot of variables.
For instance, we could say that int a,
but this ain't gonna be for the child.
Also, for instance,
another variable float B,
but this is going to be for the child,
so I just put in different name
just to say that these variables
going to be used by the child.
For instance,
you put number 10 and here you put number 5.
And then at the time of the fork.
Because a copy gonna be
generated for the child.
So if this is the memory.
And this is the parent.
A copy gonna be fully charged in the
copy of the independent variable.
A child we have the variable B child.
When we do the copy for the child
inside the memory of the child.
Also we have a under underline
child and be under line chart.
Because it's a copy,
so this way you can pass more
information to the child and then
inside these opcodes you can
say that for instance a child.
Uh.
Plus one goes to another variable and etc.
So this way a pattern can pass
more information to the child,
but just putting some more
variables and because it's a copy,
the child received both variables too.
So here is a a I mean figure for that.
So we already saw this.
But the only thing here is that you
have to be careful that it's a copy.
Although it receives the information,
but it's a copy.
If you change these copies,
they're gonna be isolated from each other.
So if the variable a.
Here is 5 and later becomes 10
by the parents. This variable.
Still inside the child is still
five and the child can make it,
for instance 25. So.
The new values of this variable
cannot be seen by the child or the
parents because they are copied.
So. In terms of operating system,
you could say that they changed
the variables inside the child
and parent process or local.
You can pass it in One Direction,
but after that any change or
local you cannot see the check.
The parent cannot see the change
by the child and vice versa. So.
Another communication happens,
so this is one way of communication
from parent to child. But uh,
at four there is no way for the parent
to do the communication with the child.
It just create the child.
But after that there is no
communication happening up until.
The moment that the child finishes,
so one communication at the time of the fork,
which is the copy of the memory
space of the parent to the child.
The second communication happens
when the child finishes.
When the child finishes,
we already said that it issues
a system called. Actually,
the library routine which calls a underlying,
except which is a system called,
passing the status code.
By this system, called the child,
tells the kernel that I'm done.
Please wake up my parent.
And the Colonel.
Find the parent of the child and
see that the parent is in the
block blocking a state or no.
If it is not in the blocking estate and
waits for the parent to call the wait
if it's already in the blocking state,
simply tells the parent that.
Here I mean in this location you can
find the exact status of the child.
So this is another communication from the
child to the parent through the kernel.
So by doing the weight,
the shell the parent waits
for the communication by the
child through the kernel.
And,
uh,
now I'm going to discuss a little
bit more about this communication
at the end of the child at the
end of the process for the child.
So basically the the parent does
the wait wait for the children to
finishes and tells the kernel that
whatever the child wants to tell me,
put that in this location.
So again, at the end of the child process,
the child says that I'm done,
so the information should
be passed to the parent,
which is just a zero exit.
Successful, but.
The parent already said
that all this information
should be at this location.
Because this status location,
which is because it's appointed
to a memory location. And.
If you are a a pattern that
doesn't care about the children,
how the child finishes,
you can simply say that I don't
have any location to store the
communication by the child,
so you can simply pass and
not value or zero value.
Basically you are telling the
camel that I just wanted to wait
for the chart to finish it, and I
don't care about how the child finishes.
So you just wait.
4. Child to finish.
But you don't care. About how.
The child finishes.
So you don't care about
how the child finishes,
you just want to wait for the
finish of finishing of the child.
However, if you are a responsible parent,
you want to see that how your child finishes,
so you have to provide a location
for the communication by the child.
This location is an integer location,
so by default is a two byte space.
And this is the address of this
two bytes inside the memory.
We usually call it the
status of the child process.
And the first, uh,
lower part is called World order point.
So you see eight bits.
Each four gonna be represented
by one hexadecimal number,
so you see at the maximum number
gonna be old ones F or the minimum
value going to be all zero,
so it becomes 00.
So the minimum value is
0000000, or the maximum value
going to be old 11111 which is F.
1111 which is F.
This is a lower order.
Also the higher order by
the same from the zero,
the minimum value up until all
or one or FF in hexadecimal.
So now if the parent.
Receive a wants to receive the
communication by the child.
How to interpret the communication
by the child? How to interpret
what the child says to the parent.
Ah, the. Operating system the
kernel provides some macros.
To interpret the result of the child the
the whatever the child says to the parent.
So just for the sake of
telling what are these macros?
I mean actually I try to figure
out what is this stands for W IF.
You could say that,
wait if or we could say that, uh, what if?
So either wait if.
Or what if?
So basically this is a
macro says that what if?
The statuses exited,
it just checked out whether this.
Value is status to those two bytes.
Can be interpreted as exited or not.
So it is true if the child basically
says that I terminated normally.
So if the child passes the zero value exit 0.
This status is going to be
interpreted as exited normally,
and if you want to see the exact value
of exact value that the child passes.
You can run another macro.
Uh. A W exit status which
gives you the status number.
I'm going to explain this
more in the field next slide.
If the child actually finishes
abnormally without a normal execute,
I mean termination,
then this macros macro returns true.
So basically says that.
What if your child signaled?
And killed by some reason.
So then this macro returns true.
And, uh, in order to see that, what signal?
Kills your child process.
You can call another macro
to find the signal number.
I'm going to explain these more.
I mean in the few next slide.
The same with this stop meaning that
your child processes stopped it.
Stop continuing the opcodes and you
can figure out what signal makes
your child process stop and etc.
So what are these macros?
So just a reminder from the C
program and macro is a preprocessing
step of the compilation.
Basically, uh, you can define a constant.
For instance, you can say that define.
And.
100 this means that before
compiling your program,
whenever the compiler sees the
character and it exactly replace
it with the character 100.
It's just a replace copy paste.
Or copy replace.
Of the characters.
One way to one smart way to use the
macros is that writing as a function.
Uh, for instance, this is a function Max.
The catalyst in maximum
of two numbers X and one.
So this is not a function,
it's a macro, meaning that wherever
you use these characters and AXXY,
it's going to be replaced by
this sequence of characters.
So it's just a replacements of comments.
Or statement in C program.
So for instance,
here this program before compiling.
The compiler search for this characters.
Max and then it sees as the as the XY
as the P and it replaces these sequence
of characters inside your program code.
Like this?
So it's not inside the opcode inside.
It's not inside the memory,
it is inside the program file.
So before the compilation it happens,
so these are called macros.
You can read more in in
references for C program.
So.
Why the macros are important?
Because they are interpreting
the communication by the child at
the time of their termination.
The operating system provides macros,
not functions.
So if you want to exactly see the
implementation of these macros,
you can go to these links and
then come to this link.
In this thing you can find the
exact implementation of the macros.
So I just put here for the
success exit success.
So what happens when the child wants to
tell the parent that I exited successfully?
So you can call the uh, this uh macro,
so forget about these underlines.
So basically you can call the macro what
if existed and then pass the value of that
location that you provide to the kernel.
And it returns. It replaced by this
statement basically checks whether
it is zero or no, but what is 0?
So it costs another macro
and this macro is here.
What termination signal?
So what is the macro?
What termination signal?
Basically it applies on
the same status bytes.
But here it does A and with a number.
So this is called masking a.
I just wanted to explain
this a little bit more. So.
The status bytes these blue and
red cells are provided by the.
Child if you want to see what
all these but orbits.
You can use masking,
meaning that you are ending with
the specific numbers in order
to figure out that what bits
are one and what bits are zero.
So for this case,
in order to see that whether the
the two parts are interpreted can
be interpreted as a success exist.
Here is what happens.
Basically it ends the uh, lower Boyd.
With these numbers 7F, so this is the seven.
And this is the app.
And then, uh, we already said
that you already know that.
If you add zeros to the left side of
any number, it doesn't have any impact,
so it fills out or pass the left
side of the number with zeros.
So this is the this number.
Or the mask? We add this number with
the actual two parts of the status.
So what happens is this.
Inside the status bits,
any bits and with the zero end up with zero.
So here whatever you have
here doesn't matter.
The result of the Ant gonna be 0.
However. Found the logic.
We know that anything and with the one.
Depends on that bit.
So we don't know the answer so one.
X If the here is the value of X,
we have to wait for the X1 and
with X we have to wait for the X.
So basically for all these bits.
We have the value of the child,
but for all the other bits we
have to we have the values here.
So this means that so this is the checking
by the what termination signal is?
So when this happens,
this ends happens all the upper.
Part becomes zero,
the lower part becomes X.
And. This is a macro,
so it's going to be replaced.
With this command.
So let me just, uh, clear it.
So basically this. Going to be
replaced exactly comes here.
So we gonna end up with
this statement. This status.
And
0X7F.
Equal to. 0.
So if we do this, we already
know that the higher byte RO 0.
And the lower byte is dependent on the X.
If the child passes exit success,
it passes the number 0.
As a result, all these bits are zero.
And one and with zero these access becomes 0.
So then this end is 0 which
is equal to zero, which.
Says that the result of this macro is zero.
That's why if the what if exited
status returns true, meaning that.
All the bits of the.
The result of this macro is zero.
I mean all the lower
bytes of the status is 0.
But we are not sure about the higher
bytes because we add them with zero.
We don't know whether the value of
the higher bites, but for the lower.
But we make sure we are sure that
the child sends us zero bits.
And if we want to see that what
are the values of the higher voids?
Here is the macro for.
See the exact status number of the child.
What if exit the status?
So basically it says that now and
this will be FF00, meaning that I
don't care about the lower boys.
Because I already know that
these are all zero,
but I want to see what are the
value of the higher bytes.
So I added with one anything and
with one returns whatever value
which is passed by the child.
And then it does 8 bit shifts to the right.
So as a result, all these eight bits.
Gonna go to the right side.
And then it returns.
So this way you can see what are
the values of the higher bytes
passed by the child to the parent.
And here is a example code.
So right after the weight call you
can say that whether the exists
interpretation of this status is
normal execution or abnormal exit.
And if it is a normal exam,
you can see what are the higher order bite.
And if it is abnormal,
you can see what is this
signal number for this macro.
And here is the sample one. They exist at.
This is zero and normal termination.
So. This is just a path in normal execution,
otherwise in the apple abnormal execution
of the child A we have something called.
As you can see here signal.
Meaning that your child terminated
abnormally by receiving a signal and you
want to see that who sends that signal
to your child and makes your child.
Exit or finish is abnormally.
And this is the topic of our next, I mean.
Lecture, so in the remaining one or
two minutes I just wanted to play
the opening scene of this movie.
Which is a opening.
This slide for our next topic
about signaling.
How two process can signal each other?
So if you are ready,
send me some feedback so I can
then start playing this movie.
So we have that we have Mason,
Danielle.
So let me bring the.
Video here.
So we have self Sam Zainab look.
We have 37 students we have Justin.
So. It's still I'm waiting for
others ban we have ban Tommy.
OK.
Jonathan Nicholas OK,
so I just played this opening scene
and then wait for your question about
today's topic and then next week
we continue with this signaling.
OK, so let's just start.
Door. They're reaching out
more IP time. I'm going to do.
Yeah.
Michelle.
Thank you. White pages.
Kate.
Curious yeah. I don't get ready.
Here there.
Have you got?
Topic. Open RPG. Rule.
Robot
really well?
The couple. Peter stay.
Move. Who pitched it?
Cricket.
Super Bowl.
OK. Hope you liked it.
Uh, one thing is that this
movie is also a good theme for.
Execution system called.
So if you watch this movie, they.
The story of this movie is
about a family that occupies.
Uh, the. House of another family,
so it's very similar to the way that
it tried process does the execution.
So. Hopefully these.
Gonna help you to understand how
the execution system called works
inside the operating system.
OK, so now I'm ready for your questions.
You too Justin have a good day.
YouTube, Danielle. Oh thank
you you too ya have a nice day.
Joshua, you're welcome.
Have a great day. And.
Thank you look. Thank you Sam.
So I'm just.